[SYCL] Forbid non-trivially-copyable type in annotated_ptr/ref class (#11798)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_annotated_ptr.asciidoc

information provided as compile-time constant properties through all uses of the
pointer unless noted otherwise.

.Not recommended Usage Example
[source,c++]
----
using sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental;
struct MyType {
  MyType(const MyType& otherM) {
     ...
  }
};

struct MyKernel {
  annotated_ptr<MyType, properties<PropA>> a; //non-trivially-copyable type
  ...
  void operator()() const {
    ...
  }
};
----
It is not recommended to apply `annotated_ptr` to a non-trivially-copyable type `T`. After
dereferencing an `annotated_ptr` to an `annotated_ref`, many operators in `annotated_ref` are
return-by-value and pass-by-value, and thus might result in inefficient memory copies.

> 

Reviewer: I  think we should go further and say that `T` must be trivially copyable.  The semantics of many of the properties are unclear when `T` is not trivially copyable, and I think we have no use case for non-trivially copyable `T`.

information provided as compile-time constant properties through all uses of the
pointer unless noted otherwise.

> .Unsupported Usage Example

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need examples for unsupported usage. Sufficient to say non-trivial-copyable is unsupported.

  }
};
----

> It is illegal to apply `annotated_ptr` to a non-trivially-copyable type `T`. In the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is ill-formed to instantiate `annotated_ptr` for a non-trivially-copyable type `T`.
```

  public:
    annotated_ref(const annotated_ref&) = delete;
    operator T() const;
    T operator=(T) const;
    T operator=(const annotated_ref&) const;
    // OP is: +=, -=, *=, /=, %=, <<=, >>=, &=, |=, ^=
    T operatorOP(T) const;

>     T operator++();

Reviewer 2: Are you adding the missing `const` in a separate PR?

Author: I thought we will passs-by-value for all compound operators as well?

Reviewer: I think @rolandschulz is asking to add `const` to the member function like this:

```
T operator++() const;
```

(Same for the other increment / decrement operators.)

Also, it looks like the table below is missing `const` on several of the member functions.  Please bring the table into alignment with the synopsis.

Author: I address this here https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/11904

  public:
    annotated_ref(const annotated_ref&) = delete;
    operator T() const;
    template <typename TT>

>     T operator=(TT&&) const;

Reviewer: Why are we adding perfect forwarding?  Can you give an example where this is better than `operator=(T)`?

Author: Hi Greg. We were considering if T is a non-trivially copyable type. If we do pass-by-value, we might have side effects there as it might invoke a bunch of copy constructor. We think to do a perfect forwarding might be the best option.

Reviewer: I think `T` does need to be trivially copyable for the reasons I mentioned in the email thread.  Most of the properties only make sense for a trivially copyable type.  For example, the cache hints assume that reads and writes of `T` are simple memory load / store operations.  It makes no sense to apply these cache hints to a function call.

Do we have some real-life use case where `T` is not trivially copyable and has some associated property?

If we do allow `T` to be non-trivially copyable, I think we will need to start documenting each property to indicate whether it can be used with non-trivially-copyable types.

Author: I am not sure if we have a real use case for non-trivially copyable type right now. If user want to stream a buffer array to kernel using pointers I guess they might go with pipes but not kernel args.

But I think we should not stop users from doing that in the future. The current annotated_ptr header is NOT ready for taking non-trivially-copyable types and we might want to support that in the future. This perfect forwarding impl is fixing the volatile type issue, but and the meantime address the LValue and RValue issue in advance.

For the non-trivially copyable type. I think we should document it in the spec, right? Roland suggested putting a warning when T is non-trivially copyable. But I am wondering if we clearly say non-trivially copyable is not supported in the spec, should we doing error or warning?

Author: Just send out another email. I think if we both agree on not supporting non-trivially copyable type then we can just do pass-by-value here

Author: Updated wth Spec with "Explicitly state that use non-trivially-copyable type in annotated_ptr is not recommended"

and do pass-by-value

    annotated_ref(const annotated_ref&) = delete;
    operator T() const;
    T operator=(const T &) const;

>     T operator=(const volatile T &) const;

Reviewer: I can't think of any standard C++ library routine that takes a `const volatile &` in addition to a `const &`  parameter.  @rolandschulz, do you know of any general C++ policy here?

My guess is that anyone using `volatile` needs to know exactly when the variable is read / written.  Therefore, you wouldn't want to pass a `volatile &` to a library function because you wouldn't know how many times the library reads / writes through the reference.

For users who have a `volatile` variable, why not require them to copy the value to a temporary like this:

```
void foo(volatile T& x) {
  T copy = x;
  annotated_ptr<T, ...> aptr;
  *aptr = copy;
}
```

Author: I think in a HW compile circumstance isn't it common to have a volatile pointer being passed to a kernel library? 

Considering we passed a volatile pointer to a sycl kernel, the volatile key word tells the compiler do not optimize away any load/store on this pointer since the external HW might change it silently.

Reviewer 2: I think we need a solution because it is reasonable to expect annotated_ptr/ref to work with volatile but STL doesn't care about that.

I think there is one reasonable alternative to the solution in this PR. Instead of adding the overload we change the (only) assignment operator to pass by value: `T operator=(T) const;`. The compiler should always inline therefore there shouldn't be a performance impact of changing that. Also this isn't a breaking change because (outside of volatile) you can pass the same to either operator.

Both solutions should produce the same code.

I think the only minor downside to the current solution is the extra complexity of the overload. I'm not aware of any downside to the other solution.

Reviewer: > I think there is one reasonable alternative to the solution in this PR. Instead of adding the overload we change the (only) assignment operator to pass by value: T operator=(T) const

This seems more reasonable to me.  I assume we would to the same thing here:

```
// OP is: +=, -=, *=, /=, %=, <<=, >>=, &=, |=, ^=
T operatorOP(const T &) const;
```

BTW, why are the assignment operators declared `const`?  Shouldn't they all be non-const?

Reviewer 2: >  I assume we would to the same thing here [compound assignment]

Not just that. We should do this consistently for all arguments taking `const T&`.

>  why are the assignment operators declared const? Shouldn't they all be non-const?

`annotated_ref` doesn't own the data (like e.g. span or ptr). The assignment changes the data not what we refer to. Therefore it is correct to assign to a `const annotated_ref` (which is allowed by it not being const) but it isn't correct to assign to assign to `annoated_ref<const T>`.

Author: Updated the PR

  public:
    annotated_ref(const annotated_ref&) = delete;
    operator T() const;
    T operator=(T) const;
    T operator=(const annotated_ref&) const;
    // OP is: +=, -=, *=, /=, %=, <<=, >>=, &=, |=, ^=

>     T operatorOP(T) const;

Reviewer 3: What is the benefit to making this change? Is it not enough to just require trivial copyability and enforce it as a static check?

Reviewer 2: to support volatile which can't be passed by `const&`

Author: The benefits it's to fix the volatile type issue.

i.e.
```
void func(const volatile int& a) { ... }
int b = 1;
func(b);  // this error out
```
with 
```
void func(volatile int a) { ... }
int b = 1;
func(b);  // this will work
```

Reviewer 3: Thank you for clarifying. 👍

  public:
    annotated_ref(const annotated_ref&) = delete;
    operator T() const;

>     template <typename TT>
>     T operator=(T) const;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    T operator=(T) const;
```

Author: That's fast LOL! Just pushed all the changes

    T operator=(const annotated_ref&) const;
    // OP is: +=, -=, *=, /=, %=, <<=, >>=, &=, |=, ^=

>     template <typename TT>
>     T operatorOP(TT&&) const;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    T operatorOP(T) const;
```

a|
[source,c++]
----
T operator=(T);
----
|

> Writes an object of type `T` to the location referenced by this wrapper via perfect forwarding,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Writes an object of type `T` to the location referenced by this wrapper,
```

a|
[source,c++]
----

> template <typename TT>
> T operatorOP(TT&&);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
T operatorOP(T);
```
